# Investigating the Impact of Travel and Rest on an NBA Win/Loss Predictive Model

## Abstract
Data analytics and data science both play an incredibly valuable role in sports. It can be used to analyze the wide range of basic and advanced statistics and present this information in a more effective way to owners, general managers, coaches, and players. Additionally, it attempts to predict future events and influence decision making in order to capitalize on advantages and mitigate disadvantages. In the National Basketball Association (NBA), teams play a four to six game pre-season over the course of three to four weeks followed by an 82-game regular season schedule that spans 26 weeks (Huyghe et al., 2018). The results of the regular season seed teams for the eight-week playoffs which culminates in the NBA Finals where a victorious team is crowned champion. Over the course of the regular season, players travel across North America for 41 games at their home arena and 41 games at opponents’ home arenas, travelling on average an approximated 45000 miles in the regular season alone. For the league’s playoff teams, the postseason brings around 3000 miles of additional travel per series (Mahoney, 2018). The effect of travel (and consequently, sleep) on players and their performance has been analyzed closely in the past, with teams accounting for densely packed portions of schedules by providing their top players with additional rest (Caple, 2017; Holmes, 2016).

This analytical project will work to develop a classification-based win/loss prediction model based on previous seasons in the NBA. Team travel distance, change in time zone, and the number of days between games will be included in its list of factors, in additional to a team’s offensive and defensive stats and their opponent’s. This research aims to identify the magnitude of impact that travel distance and the number of days between games has on player and team performance. Overall, does the presence of these factors in a win/loss regression model have a significant positive net impact on performance metrics, or are other factors much more important for teams to consider? This project will be using the NBA Enhanced Box Score and Standings dataset to populate its training and test sets. This database contains a complete list of all games from the 2012-2013 season to the 2017-2018 season as well as player and team stats, game results, and final scores (Rossotti, 2018). The travel distance and change in timezone will be computed separately and appended to the dataset to introduce these factors to the model. Analysis, classification model development, and data visualization will primarily take place in R. The geosphere package will be used in order to compute the distances between any two locations which will be provided by Google and stored in a local data frame. Tableau will also be used to further refine any data visualizations for presenting the findings of this project.


## Data Preprocessing
Several steps will be needed to ensure the dataset is properly prepared for use in modelling. The first stage was to transform the provided dataset in order to contain the desired factors for this project. The original dataset only contained the days of rest as well as single game statistics for team performance. Additionally, each game had six rows of data (one row per team per referee). After removing duplicate games by creating a subset focusing on the teams playing at home, any redundant or unnecessary columns at this time were removed. This included attributes such as referee names, scoring per quarter, and anything else besides previously identified predictor variables. Team abbreviations and dates were kept through this stage in order to assist with data verification and determining team performance rolling averages. R was used to parse through each team’s list of games and determine their rolling averages for the predictor factors mentioned above. This methodology is detailed more extensively in the file [dataset prep.rmd](https://github.com/Andrew-W-Payne/CIND820/blob/main/dataset%20prep.Rmd).

From hereafter, further data processing is necessary. First, games with missing or illogical data will be removed. There were no missing values in the dataset initially; however, with the creation of rolling averages for game statistics, there are games with missing values which shall be removed. Games with greater or fewer than 240 minutes played will also be removed, as these can be due to calculation errors, game cancellations, or overtime matches. Overtime matches are being removed as they occur too infrequently to develop consistent models on. These will be identified by the columns teamPTS5 through teamPTS8 (points scored in overtime periods 1 through 4). Outliers will be identified as values greater than or less than three standard deviations away from the mean of each attribute. For example, games where a team has more than 5 days of rest will be removed as they occur very infrequently. The class variable teamRslt will also need to be factorized for a classification model to be computed from, and this class variable may need to be balanced. Out of 5003 valid games, the home team had a winning record of 2952 wins to 2051 losses (or 59.0%). At this point, the dataset will be ready for classification procedures. Each numeric attribute will then be normalized 


## Initial Results

